Speculative Messaging v0.5: streams + POV lifts; factor out Off-Chain Block Verification and Super Chains (#12659)
paritytech/polkadot-sdk: docs/speculative-messaging-design.md

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| **Authors** | eskimor |
| **Status** | Ready for review |
| **Version** | 0.5 |
| **Related Designs** | [Low-Latency Parachains v2](low-latency-v2-design.md), [Off-Chain Block Verification](offchain-block-verification-design.md), [Super Chains](super-chains-design.md) |

### Version History

Each entry says what changed and which sections to (re)read; small
changesets can be absorbed from here alone, large ones (like 0.5) mean
re-reading the listed sections.

| Version | Changes |
|---------|---------|

> | 0.5 | Root-hash-only commitments return (reverting 0.3's flat sets, as its own analysis [PR #10449](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/pull/10449) anticipated): relay state is a fixed-size ring of recent `StreamsRoot`s per sender; the structured `StreamId` replaces the plain destination `ParaId`; channels become unidirectional with flow control via a lossy per-channel register (acceptance, advisory credit, watermark, close); lossy broadcast streams (pub-sub). **Requires handling unified into one code path for all scenarios** (steady state, partial consumption, resubmission, bundles): blocks emit no `Requires` and never see a `StreamsRoot`—they record per touched stream an interval (consumption start/end), the validate_block wrapper stitches the intervals across the bundle (gaps advance-proven forward) and synthesizes the candidate's entries via one POV-carried lift per stream, binding the chain's endpoint; 0.3's in-block catch-up proofs and separate late-block proofs are gone. Authoring always targets the newest root at its tier; the relay window is pipeline slack only. Fetch protocol reduced to two root-keyed request pairs, every response independently verifiable against a requester-named root. Lift-serving obligations bounded at 25 h, mirroring availability retention. **Full rewrite—re-read the Detailed Design entirely**, plus Trust Domains (the tier table). |

Reviewer: > every response independently verifiable against a requester-named root

I dont believe we can prove an empty stream is under a StreamRoot. The TreeInclusionProof only proves that an existing data is under the said root (ie inclusion only). It can't check either:
- the stream is empty (source hasn't sent data yet)
- peer lags and doesn't have the data
- peer is eclipsing / withholding a stream that has content

This got triggered a few times while stress testing the e2e zombinet flow for poc-v2:
- The channel lifecycle is open_channel + accept_open_channel
- Since we allow accepting the channel first, the receiver can accept and arm the stream as consumed (under consumed_streams), then the receiver will start fetching data from the stream
- The race condition happens when the receiver fetches before the sender actually propagates the first message
- Since the p2p /spec-msg/exchange verifies the payload, there's a window of time after accepting the channel where fetches will return `UnknownStream` (ie doent match to the stream root)

Then in the PoC this caused a deadlock, and the simplest fix was to tolerate errors for cursor 0. However, that opens up an attack surface for the first few messages. A few options to close the gap:
- open and send data for the receiver arms consumption 
- sender writes a marker leaf when the channel opens so that every consumed ctreams have at least 1 inclusion-provable entry
- or something like inclusion proofs

Probably the marker leaf is the easiest to implement, but would need mentioning
Would love to get your thoughts on this 🙏

Author: Not following. The OpenChannel is a regular message, no?

Reviewer: Yep `OpenChannel` is a regular message placed as a signal leaf on the channel data stream, written as a first leaf when the `open_channel` is called 

https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/436cd3373a71f1c2251ce3976ee04220cf2646be/cumulus/primitives/spec-messaging/src/channel.rs#L80-L88

https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/436cd3373a71f1c2251ce3976ee04220cf2646be/cumulus/pallets/spec-messaging/src/lib.rs#L1121

However, the `open_channel` is local and arms consumption immediately.

IIUC the doc [states](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/pull/12659/changes#diff-00e6abf05b7ce4599fc57dbc43c1f3ec60720109b384a9807d5276258ad6d277L5-R2960) that consumption could be empty until A opens:
>  Both orders work: extrinsic first is pre-authorization (stream consumed
but empty until A opens);

- accept first: peer accepts and its collators start fetching before the opener has written `OpenChannel`.  Receiver fetches a stream the sender has written nothing yet (not even the `OpenChannel`. Inclusion proofs can't prove that emptiness

>  open first leaves A's `OpenChannel` leaf
sitting in A's stream until acceptance. 

- open first: opener writes `OpenChannel` leaf, peer then accepts and fetches. In this case the stream has leaf 0 

The issue is around the accept-first where the stream is fetched and consumed while still empty.

Then the fetch protocol specifies that requests must be verifiable:
> every response independently verifiable against the requester-chosen

### Accept First

- T0: B accept_open_channel with A (not yet opened)
- T1: B arms `consumed_streams`
- T2: B node fetches from A's stream (if empty then we err with UnknownStream)
- T3: A calls open_channel and writes `OpenChannel` leaf

### Open Before Accept

- T0: A calls open_channel
- T1: B calls accept_open_channel (A stream is non empty) and at this point `UnknownStream` is a real fatal error

Removing the `accept-first` simplifies the relay fetch logic by eliminating the `UnkownStream` retries
 - The downside is that we need to close the gap on the operators. We could require an inclusion proof of `OpenChannel` to the `accept_open_channel` and validate it against the recent provides
 
 If we tolerate the `accept first` we must account for a window where verification returns `UnknownStream`. During this window, we cannot distinguish between peers intentionally withholding info
  - We'd need to introduce a new `ChannelPhase::Pending` where the state is tolerated via `consumed_streams`
  
  
Another alternative would be having non-inclusion-proofs:

```rust
pub struct TreeNonInclusionProof {
      present_key:  StreamId,             // the neighbor leaf K's lookup lands on
      present_root: MmrRoot,
      steps:        Vec<(u8, Hash)>,      // its inclusion path — same shape as
  TreeInclusionProof
  }

  impl TreeNonInclusionProof {
      /// Returns the StreamsRoot that `absent` is proven NOT under.
      /// Caller compares it to the relay-committed R.
      pub fn verify(&self, absent: &StreamId) -> Result<StreamsRoot, TreeError> {
          if &self.present_key == absent {                 // (2) it's a *different* key
              return Err(TreeError::KeyPresent);
          }
          let (a, p) = (absent.to_bytes(), self.present_key.to_bytes());
          let mut prev = KEY_BITS;
          for (bit, _sib) in &self.steps {                 // (3) absent takes the SAME turns
              if *bit >= prev { return Err(TreeError::InvalidPath); }
              prev = *bit;
              if bit_at(&a, *bit) != bit_at(&p, *bit) {
                  return Err(TreeError::DivergentPath);    // absent would branch off elsewhere
              }
          }
          // (1) reconstruct R from the neighbor leaf — the *existing* inclusion verify
          TreeInclusionProof { steps: self.steps.clone() }
              .verify(&self.present_key, &self.present_root)
      }
  }
```

Reviewer: TLDR this adds roughly:
 - ~40 LoC for verify + ~ prove absert another ~30 LoC
 - `MessageResponse::Absert { proof }` variant over the wire

And lets us keep the `accept-first` without any `Pending` states on consumed_streams or modifying accept paths. Would love to get your feedback on this 🙏

Author: Good catch. Yes I think tolerating in the startup phase is the best fix. Worst thing that can happen is that peers can delay the stream opening. We should make sure that on each block/query interval we are asking a different peer, so we will be unstuck eventually in case of malicious peers. Given that streams are long-lived, I think this is totally fine. I don't think we need a pending state, we know from the MessagePosition being 0, that we are in this state.

   never sees. The standard layout: one channel stream per channel a chain
   sends on, one ack register per channel it receives on, plus optional
   broadcast streams—the ids' meaning is parachain convention.

2. **Emit Commitments**: Sending chains commit **one hash** per block—the
   `StreamsRoot`, root of a keyed commitment tree over all their stream
   roots. Receiving chains' candidates carry "requires" commitments—one
   `(source, StreamsRoot)` entry per source chain depended on—synthesized
   during validation from what their blocks consumed.

3. **Off-Chain Coordination**: Collators exchange messages directly, without
   relay chain involvement.

4. **Relay Chain Enforcement**: At inclusion time, the relay chain verifies
   that all "requires" are satisfied by corresponding "provides"—a hash
   membership check against a small per-sender window of recent
   `StreamsRoot`s. It never sees streams, positions, or proofs.

5. **Proofs, all parachain-side**: Everything below the top hash is
   verified by the receiver itself. Its runtime verifies payloads by
   recomputation (the block body carries only payloads and per-read MMR

>    inclusion proofs—never a `StreamsRoot`); the PVF binds the block's

Reviewer 2: This sentence predates the Messaging Inherent revision and now contradicts it: §The Messaging Inherent says `MmrInclusionProof` **never crosses the node–runtime boundary** — register/event reads arrive as `Events { base, start_peaks, payloads }` and the runtime recomputes; no proof objects in the block body. A first-time reader absorbs this mental model here and has it reversed 750 lines later.

```suggestion
   recomputation (the block body carries payloads and trust-free positioning
   hints—no proof objects, never a `StreamsRoot`); the PVF binds the block's
```

- Anything else a chain wants—an out-of-band priority lane, or semantics
  not yet invented—rides a private-use kind, deployable without anyone's
  coordination, by construction.

Channels are unidirectional, and one channel spans **two chains' stream
sets**: the sender's data stream plus the *receiver's* register (domain/
subdomain zeros elided throughout):

```
  Channel A→B  =  A's Channel{B, 0}  (data + signals)
               +  B's Ack{A, 0}      (register)

  Channel B→A  =  B's Channel{A, 0}
               +  A's Ack{B, 0}

Chain A's full stream set (channels with B and C, one event feed):
  ├── Channel{B, 0}   → [Msg1, Msg2, Msg3, ...]   A's half of channel A→B
  ├── Channel{C, 0}   → [Msg1, Msg2, ...]         A's half of channel A→C
  ├── Ack{B, 0}       → [.., Register]            A's half of channel B→A
  └── Broadcast{0}    → [Evt1, Evt2, ...]         events, any subscriber
```

Note nothing of A's completes A's own channels—`Ack{B, 0}` above exists
only because B opened a channel *toward* A; a chain that only ever sends
to B has no Ack streams at all.

**Why per-destination streams (for the channel convention)?**

> - Receiver only cares about their own stream—high volume to other chains

Reviewer: nit: IIUC, the receiver will fetch their channels all the time unless we have a `Vec<ParaID>` on the UMP or p2p notification hint added 🤔

Author: Yes. The idea is that you learn about a sending block and the provides root in some way and if it differs from what you have, you request the messages. Should be tolerable, it is just one more request per block, with empty payload if there were no messages.  I believe this will go a very long way  and indeed if we ever need to improve a p2p pub-sub/notification protocol would be the way to go.

/// trie keyed by the canonical SCALE encoding of StreamId (8 bytes),
/// leaves = the streams' MMR roots.
/// Distinct newtype from MmrRoot—the two kinds of root flow through
/// different checks and must not be confusable.
struct StreamsRoot(Hash);

/// Proof that one stream's MMR root is the entry at its StreamId under a
/// given StreamsRoot: the sibling hashes along the id's path through the
/// trie (~log₂(S) of them) plus the path-compression metadata the compact
/// trie structure requires. The verifier reconstructs the path from
/// (StreamId, MmrRoot) upward and compares the result against the
/// StreamsRoot—id and root are both bound by the path, neither is taken on
/// faith.
///
/// The node encoding is CONSENSUS-CRITICAL and protocol-fixed: every
/// implementation must reproduce byte-identical StreamsRoots and every
/// foreign node must verify these proofs. The concrete byte format is
/// specified with the primitives (companion to the #12346 family), under
/// two constraints mandated here: domain-tagged node hashing with no
/// ambiguous parses (same rationale as Leaf Hashing), and injective node
/// encoding.
struct TreeInclusionProof {
    siblings: Vec<Hash>,

>     // + compact-trie path metadata

Reviewer: I think we can carry directly the branch bits next to the hashes as `(u8, Hash)`. Otherwise, we can't tell how many levels where skipped or if the node is left or right.  Will double check soon, but IIRC it was something we have discovered in v1 of the design as well 🤔

Reviewer: This struct would turn into:

```rust
 pub struct TreeInclusionProof {
      /// `(branch bit, sibling hash)` per branch on the path, leaf-to-root;
      /// bit indices strictly decreasing. A path  cannot have more branches
      /// than the key has bits.
      pub steps: BoundedVec<(u8, Hash), ConstU32<{KEY_BITS as u32 }>>,
  }
  ```
  
- The bits must be there since the trie's shape depends on the sender's key set. The bit is inside the inner-node preimage as `TREE_INNER_TAG ++  bit ++ left ++ right`

https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/436cd3373a71f1c2251ce3976ee04220cf2646be/cumulus/primitives/spec-messaging/src/tree.rs#L88-L93

- 1 byte per bit is quite minimal and is doc conformant as "compact-trie path metadata"
- `KEY_BITS = 64` gives us an upper boud that lets the `max_encoded_len` compute the `LIFT_RESERVATION_BYTES`

Reviewer 2: Agreed on the shape — `(branch bit, sibling)` per step, the bit bound into the inner-node preimage, direction derived from the key.

One note: I'd keep each step as a named `TreeStep { split_bit: u8, sibling: Hash }` rather than a bare `(u8, Hash)` — identical SCALE encoding, but self-documenting about what the u8 is.

Author: Thanks! Indeed, will add.

Streams crossed that line, three times over:

- **Entry counts multiply**: channel + ack + broadcast streams, several per
  peer, unbounded in principle.
- **A new cost class appears** that the 0.3 analysis never had to price: a
  flat scheme keys *persistent relay state* by stream, dragging in
  permanence rules for dormant entries, a per-sender stream budget, and
  offboarding hygiene.
- **Flat entries ossify semantics**: the relay-visible schema is party to
  what an entry means—introducing ack registers and broadcast streams
  would have changed the relay chain interface again, as would every
  future kind. Under the root, the relay chain holds one hash and is done
  evolving: lossy, multi-lane, or not-yet-invented semantics are parachain
  convention, deployable with zero relay chain changes (this is what makes
  the private-use kinds of `StreamId` possible at all).

The tree removes the entire per-stream relay footprint at once: provides is
32 B regardless of stream count, requires is bounded by the number of
*parachains*, and how many streams a chain runs is nobody's business but
its own—**outbound streams are effectively unbounded and free**.

> What we pay, honestly: receivers carry ~300 B of inclusion proofs

Reviewer: nit: Should mention here that we'll also pay polling on the p2p side, since receivers cannot distinguish if a messages is arriving for them 🤔

/// Distinct newtype from MmrRoot—the two kinds of root flow through
/// different checks and must not be confusable.
struct StreamsRoot(Hash);

/// Proof that one stream's MMR root is the entry at its StreamId under a
/// given StreamsRoot: one step per branch on the id's path (~log₂(S) of
/// them). Each step must carry its split-bit position alongside the
/// sibling hash—path compression makes the branch positions a function
/// of the *other* keys in the tree, which the verifier does not know,
/// and without the position neither the step's direction (our key's bit
/// at the split decides left/right) nor the number of compressed levels
/// is determinable. The verifier reconstructs the path from
/// (StreamId, MmrRoot) upward and compares the result against the
/// StreamsRoot—id and root are both bound by the path, neither is taken
/// on faith.
///
/// The node encoding is CONSENSUS-CRITICAL and protocol-fixed: every
/// implementation must reproduce byte-identical StreamsRoots and every
/// foreign node must verify these proofs. The concrete byte format is
/// specified with the primitives (companion to the #12346 family), under

> /// four constraints mandated here:

Reviewer 2: The consensus-critical surface is much broader than the one place vectors are mandated (`StreamId`): the byte format deferred here, the canonical `tree_hash` construction, the MMR + tree domain tags, extension-proof connecting-node ordering (derived from the two leaf counts), the strictly-increasing canonical decodes (`RequiresSet`, lift transport), and the `stitch`/`build_requires` semantics running in the PVF — all of it must be bit-identical across every implementation.

Suggestion: promote a conformance suite to the same normative standing as the encoding rules themselves — id vectors, tree vectors including adversarial step orderings, extension/advance vectors, and full record→requires synthesis vectors.

I've drafted the byte formats in the primitives branch: [speculative-messaging-encoding-spec.md](https://github.com/yrong/polkadot-sdk/blob/052d034c4e5/docs/speculative-messaging-encoding-spec.md). It basically follows the MVP branch with some minor fixes, Just sharing it as a reference.

/// implementations only need "sorted, unique, bounded" instead of replicating
/// a lenient parser's quirks. Construction is sealed: `try_from_iter` (sorts,
/// rejects duplicates) and `Decode` are the only ways in; no mutable access.
///
/// One entry per SOURCE, not per stream: the StreamsRoot covers all of that
/// source's streams at once, so the set is naturally bounded by the number
/// of parachains a receiver consumes from.

> struct RequiresSet(BoundedVec<(ParaId, StreamsRoot), MaxCommitmentEntries>);

Reviewer: nit: Value of `~200` is scoped under limits section, could add here the constant as rounded up to 256. (with mention that in the unlikely scenario that we'll get more parachains we'll need to bump it it)

https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/20cd9ce02ecedeacfd3119d7277f94f2812df514/polkadot/primitives/src/v9/spec_messaging.rs#L59

enum UMPSignal {
    // ... existing signals ...
    /// Sender side: the root of our stream commitment tree after this
    /// block. One hash, constant size. Emitted only by blocks that touched
    /// at least one stream—an untouched tree has an unchanged root, and
    /// re-emitting it would only push a duplicate into the relay window.

>     Provides(StreamsRoot),

Reviewer: One big networking downside of having a single `StreamsRoot` is that collators on the receiving side will need to query the sender on the p2p layer to find out if sender has new messages.

If the sender has 20 channels open but only talks to 2 chains in this block, all the other will fetch for their channels under that root and on every root change. 
- The receiver side already publishes the consumption graph under `RequiresSet`

If we turn this into `Provides(StreamsRoot, Vec<ParaId>)` with a sorted listed of ParaIDs we talk in this block:
- For a sender candidate that talks with only F chains and C consumers for the sender, we'd spend `4 * F` bytes on chain and save `(C - F) * ~600 B` in request-response + (C - F) on demand dials
  - The on demand dials happen because the connection to said parachains doesn't have a long living substream like notification-protocol to keep the connection alive (ie no block notifications) and connections will terminate after 5s due to the keep alive mechanism
  - A sender with 20 consumers and writing to only 2 per block: on chain 8B to avoid ~11KiB of p2p per root. This ratio holds even better the more one to many senders we have. 

The other p2p alternative is to move the announcement off chain:
- We introduce a new /spec-msg/notif that announces the chain has new messages under a root. We'd need to validate said notification by fetching on the /spec-msg/exchange protocol
- This fits better with the broadcast streams since the `Provides(StreamsRoot, Vec<ParaId>)` only covers the normal A->B MVP workflow

Pushing this one step further on the p2p layer:
- We dont really need the /spec-msg/notif since we can implement the notification as unsolicited responses 
- Sender pushes `MessageResponse::Messages` to chains that communicate with it 
- The discovery gets flipped: senders will need to find the chains it wants to communicate instead of the receivers doing the scraping
- This is entirely doable with litep2p user custom protocols: https://github.com/paritytech/litep2p/blob/6e21525cb62a4b7ffeb482c9281783d687dc9d59/src/protocol/mod.rs#L132-L143
- The change can happen post MVP

Even so with elastic scaling and `Provides(StreamsRoot, Vec<ParaId>)` we'd add 8B of chain data to save ~33 K of p2p traffic per sender per relayblock (ie 3 cores * 11KiB). And this doesn't take into account the Ack paths. At the worst, we'd have ~2K (256 * 8) of relay data per sender to save at the best case (for the optimistic scenario nonelsatic scaling) 11KiB of p2p traffic. It might be worth adding this either way 🤔 

Would love to get your thoughts 🙏

Reviewer 2: Great analysis — the amplification is real: with one `StreamsRoot` the monitor can't tell whose stream moved, so every consumer fetches on every root change, and with no long-lived substream each is a fresh dial.

On **off-chain push**: I think it earns its keep specifically with LLv2 / atomic enactment — it's proactive *pre-inclusion* propagation, and speculatively consuming not-yet-included messages is only safe once atomic enactment makes the sender/receiver pair enact all-or-nothing. In the inclusion-tier MVP, receiver-pull off relay state is the right fit, so I'd treat push as the post-MVP endgame, landing alongside LLv2.

On **option 1 (`Vec<ParaId>`)**: it's variable size (`4·n`, worst case `MAX_COMMITMENT_ENTRIES·4 ≈ 1 KB` for 256 chains), so it's not great when many streams change in a block. Since `StreamId` is a sparse 8-byte key, I'd suggest a **hash-based Bloom filter** instead — hash the `StreamId` to `k` bit positions in an `m`-bit array:
- **`m`** = filter size in bits, e.g. `256` (= 32 bytes)
- **`k`** = number of hash functions, i.e. bit positions each element sets (sender) / checks (receiver), e.g. `4`
- (**`n`** in the FP formula = elements inserted = streams the sender wrote this block)

So `Provides(StreamsRoot, BloomFilter)` = a 32-byte array where each changed `StreamId` sets 4 bits, and a receiver checks its own `StreamId`'s 4 bits (all set → maybe → fetch; any unset → skip). FP `≈ (1 − e^(−kn/m))^4` — negligible for typical fan-out (~1e-6 at `n=2`), reaching only ~2.4% at `n=32` and degrading gracefully to "everyone fetches" when the sender touched everyone (which is correct).

The win: **fixed 32 bytes no matter how many streams change** — same size as the root, ~16× tighter worst case than `Vec`, no false negatives (honest sender), a few false positives (occasional wasted fetch).

Author: I don't think involving the relay chain is a good idea here. The goal is actual speculative messaging eventually and here relying on the relay chain would not work at all.

Also I am not sure I agree there is even a problem. We either are relatively slow (inclusion/backing based), which means one request every 6 to 12s, even if we dialed in anew each time, that would be fine.

For actual speculative flows, e.g. with 500ms blocks, you would need to listen for block announcements anyways and thus would already have an open connection, sending a few bytes over an already open connection to learn that there are no messages seems fine too.

Author: In the end the problem is n to n direct communication, which scales to the power of 2, so not too great. If we ever run into problems here, I believe the solution would be hub chains ... so we get some  topology. But also, I can't tell you how happy I would be to have a need for solving this.

Author: Notifying the receiver is also not that straight forward in practice. For receiving, you need to find one good peer to get you the data. For notifying, you need to find all collators and need to make sure you notified all of them. (One honest collator assumption.) 

TL;DR: I would optimize the polling, which is already triggered by block propagating, which in itself is far from optimal and bigger gains are certainly possible there, instead of trying to avoid a few empty payload requests. Other optimizations are possible too, e.g. if some more latency is acceptable after idle you could only request every second, every fourth block, ... if no messages are being sent ... but we are talking about a theoretic kb sized problem, I would not worry too much about it right now, if we can agree that the relay chain will not be the solution.

Reviewer: > For actual speculative flows, e.g. with 500ms blocks, you would need to listen for block announcements anyways and thus would already have an open connection

Yep exactly, we can optimize this post MVP if it becomes an issue for sure. And since the spec-msg needs to be compatible with JAM the less we put on the relay chain the better

listed by `consumed_streams()`—channel acceptance happens via extrinsic
(see [Channels](#channels)), so no unsolicited-data path exists that the
API would have to leave unlisted.

Inputs flow back into the runtime exclusively through the messaging
inherent ([#12531](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/issues/12531)):
fetched payloads (with inclusion proofs for register/event reads) and
ack-register reads—never a `StreamsRoot` (see
Verification below for why the runtime has no use for one). The runtime
verifies by recomputation—the API and the inherent are a trust boundary,
not a trusted channel.

**Recovery from downtime falls out of this split.** All authoring-relevant
state is consensus state behind the API—a returning collator syncs its
chain and resumes: `consumed_streams()` says where fetching continues;
already-consumed messages need no refetch (state reflects them). The one
node-local structure, the sender-side archive, rebuilds during sync if the
node executes the missed blocks (each block's `outbound_messages()`
regenerates in passing); a node syncing without execution instead fetches
the missing range from its own chain's other nodes—the ordinary fetch

> protocol, pointed at one's own streams.

Reviewer: nit: IIRC we briefly touched this one of our meetings (cc https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/issues/12583#issuecomment-5067109606)

```suggestion
protocol, pointed at one's own streams.

#### Relay Runtime API (the Node–Relay Boundary)

The boundary earlier has a counterpart on the relay side. In this design, the collator
needs to read information from the relay chain in three specific situations:
fetching under a root, reading the inclusion register, and choosing a root during verification.

To handle those paths, we introduce a relay side runtime API call:

``rust
/// Returns the newest included `StreamsRoot` for a given sender.
/// This is the head of its `RecentProvides` ring.
/// Returns `None` if the sender has never provided data or was offboarded
/// (the system doesn't need to distinguish between the two).
fn recent_provides(source: ParaId) -> Option<StreamsRoot>;
``

**Why only the newest root?**

The "head" (the newest root) is the only thing the node actually needs to interact with.
The history of older roots (the ring) is just internal state used for matching. If we returned
the whole ring, we'd be unnecessarily exposing the window size `(W)` as a hardcoded API requirement.

Additionally, if a node skips a few roots it doesn't matter. The node only needs to build against
the latest root, and there's no requirement to observe every single historical update.

**Why an API call instead of storage key?**

We have considered the well-known storage key (standard in Cumulus) but rejected it.
The well-known keys are needed when the node wants to prove a read, like storage proofs in PVF.
In this case, the node simply checks its own client state with nothing to prove. Using an API
gives us a direct answer without locking the internal storage layout.

**Polling and Recovery**

In practice, the API works through simple polling which handles node recovery as well. Every
time a relay block is imported, the collator checks `recent_provides` and compares the newest
root against its last known state.

If the node restarts, there is no special recovery process. The very first poll after syncing is
used as the only information needed to continue authoring. There are no event streams to manage
or histories to replay. 

Similar to the parachain boundary, nothing read through this API enters the runtime directly.
The newest root is only used to set up fetching and generate lifts. The runtime verifies everything
on its own by recomputing the data (ie, it never handles a `StreamsRoot` directly.
```

Reviewer: We could skip this if we decide to go to JAM directly, there we'll do a raw read from (key tag ++ scale(para_id))

Author: Even if we add this runtime API, the changes are tiny. I really see no reason to delay all of this until JAM arrives. And also on JAM I would recommend against raw reads of any kind.

Author: Happy to add this, but have we verified whether we have events with that information already available?

binding the results to committed roots is the `validate_block`
wrapper's job (see
[Requires Lifting](#requires-lifting-pov-proofs)). A tampered input
merely yields an endpoint no lift can bind: node-side pre-verification
(fetching under a root verified at the receiver's tier) protects the
honest collator, the lift protects consensus.

Unlike the fetch protocol, the inherent format is **chain-internal, not
interoperability-normative**: only the resulting commitments are
consensus-visible to anyone else. The shape:

```rust
/// What the inherent provider hands the runtime per block. Built
/// node-side by the fetch pipeline from responses verified under the
/// receiver's tier roots; the runtime re-verifies everything it uses by
/// recomputation. Deliberately no roots and no proofs of any kind.
struct MessagingInherentData {
    items: Vec<(ParaId, StreamId, ConsumeItem)>,
}

/// One stream's consumption this block. Both arms verify identically—
/// hash payloads into leaves, append to a frontier, let the lift bind
/// the endpoint—differing only in WHERE the frontier comes from
/// (mirroring the two consumption disciplines, see Event Streams).

> enum ConsumeItem {

Reviewer 2: Agree with this shape — one `items` vec, two `ConsumeItem` arms is the honest encoding: both arms (message & event) verify identically, the runtime verifies by **recomputation into the consumption record, with no proof objects**.

cc @lexnv — one delta against `spec-msg-poc-mvp`: `MmrInclusionProof` still [crosses the boundary](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/436cd3373a71f1c2251ce3976ee04220cf2646be/cumulus/primitives/spec-messaging/src/inherent.rs#L58) there; [`build_inherent`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/436cd3373a71f1c2251ce3976ee04220cf2646be/cumulus/client/spec-msg/src/pool.rs#L774) should just emit the hints (`base`, `start_peaks`) instead of the proof — the pool already holds the verified frontier, so nothing new to compute.

The runtime's single verification discipline is recomputation, at no
byte cost: an inclusion proof is internally sibling path + peaks
(~2 log n hashes); the recomputation form is peaks + lift extension,
the same two O(log n) components—the bytes merely move from a proof
object in the block body to the candidate's ordinary lift, already
covered by the per-stream reservation.

Dispatch rules:

- **Mandatory, and first in the block** (like all inherents)—consumption
  capacity cannot be crowded out by extrinsics (see
  [Delivery Contract](#delivery-contract-ordered-and-guaranteed)).
- **Absent = consumed nothing.** Empty data produces no inherent call at
  all; a block that fetched nothing carries none, touches no stream, and
  emits no requires. Consuming nothing costs nothing.
- **At most one item per stream and block**—the consumption record's
  one-interval-per-stream shape, enforced at dispatch.
- **Strict on import: one invalid item invalidates the block.** Any
  invalid item (undeclared stream, cap violation, kind/discipline
  mismatch, `base ≤ highwater`) errors the mandatory dispatch—the
  standard inherent pattern (cf. `paras_inherent`): filter when

>   *building* (the inherent provider simply doesn't include bad items),

Reviewer 2: Good rationale. cc @lexnv — we'll need to revamp the PoC to align with it: current [`enact_messages`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/436cd3373a71f1c2251ce3976ee04220cf2646be/cumulus/pallets/spec-messaging/src/lib.rs#L973) rejects invalid items individually via `ItemRejected` and the dispatch always succeeds.

the "name the attack it prevents" test in this architecture:

- **source / destination**: stream context is already bound *structurally*.
  Every stream root lives at its `StreamId`'s key in the sender's
  commitment tree, and every verification walks a tree proof that binds
  that key—a root never exists detached from its stream. A message in A's
  `Channel{C, d, n}` stream lives only under that stream's entry and can
  never verify against the `Channel{B, d, n}` entry, regardless of
  preimage contents. Cross-stream/cross-source replay is impossible
  without any leaf-level binding.
- **position**: order and multiplicity are what the MMR *is*—appending the
  same payloads in a different order or count yields a different root.
  Nothing is left for a position field to prevent.
- **length prefix**: with the payload as the single trailing variable-length
  field, the encoding is already injective.

### Relay Chain Matching

When the relay chain processes candidates for inclusion, it performs commitment
matching. The relay chain only sees the minimal commitments (hashes), not
internal state.

The relay chain maintains **one small ring per sender**—the last W committed

> `StreamsRoot`s—and nothing else:

Reviewer 2: On the relay-side matching (virtual window / enactment dependencies): I assume its value is concentrated in the speculative / same-block / super-chain case — a receiver consuming from a source candidate being included in the same relay block, which isn't yet in any header the receiver can read, the relay match is the piece that closes the loop, also acting as a supplement / final safety guard on top of Off-Chain Parachain Block Verification (which itself rests on collator slashable, economic, and probabilistic guarantees).

For inclusion-based batching, though, I'm not sure a dedicated relay field or UMP signal is needed to carry the StreamsRoot at all. The relay already commits every parachain head under mmr.rootHash: each MMR leaf carries, as its extra_data, the binary-Merkle root over all parachain heads (ParaHeadsRootProvider), and the head bytes are the leaf preimage — so that root anchors anything in a head, including the StreamsRoot committed into the header digest. Because the relay MMR commits history, a receiver anchors to a past head-leaf via an MMR inclusion proof — the MMR's history subsumes the ring's window, so no dedicated ring is needed to cover the authoring→inclusion gap.

If that's right, the whole inclusion-based verification could move into the receiver PVF — just a few composed proof layers (MMR inclusion → para_heads Merkle → the head digest → the consumed stream), with no relay-side changes at this stage.

Does that match your thinking, or am I missing a reason the relay-side carry/match is needed even for the plain inclusion consume tier — e.g. the PoV cost of carrying those proofs in every receiver block?

Author: I think you are right. For the inclusion based tier this should work as well, but indeed not for the speculative tier where this design is coming from. So we would need both eventually, while the proposed works for all tiers. A single root hash per candidate is not really an overhead worth mentioning, a vec maintaining a bit of backlog seems fine too. The relay commitment to para heads [is flawed](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/9d0a0daee40e6e350209aaf4b3e3bdf1fb9a8793/polkadot/runtime/parachains/src/paras/mod.rs#L1466) as it stands today too, because it can't actually provide all roots - they are collected each block and the number of parachains (including non-active) is not really bounded. The comment suggests that this is only needed for offchain XCMP, which we are replacing with speculative messaging, thus using this simple vec of recent provides root is actually a fix for that problem.

TL;DR: You are right that this would be an alternative, I would not see it as better though because it adds complexity and another code path - we need to provides inclusion matching for the speculative tier and that implementation is also flawed as it stands today.

```rust
fn verify_requires(
    candidates: &[CandidateReceipt],  // all candidates in this relay block
    stored: &BTreeMap<ParaId, RecentRoots>,
) -> Result<(), Error> {

>     // Transient: stored windows ∪ provides of the candidates at hand

Reviewer: For the speculation at the speculative tier (best block):
- the sender block arrives at relay N, the cnadidate is backed but pending availability (root is not in the stored ring)
- the receiver side arrives at block N + 1 

The window says "stored windows ∪ provides of the candidates at hand", in this case the receiver block gets dropped. The collator will resubmit it until the source is included with the `StreamRoot` in the ring

Just something to note, would love to get your thoughts on this 🙏

**lift** per recorded stream binding its state to a current committed
root. The relay chain only ever sees entries it can match. (Verification
inside `validate_block`, like Low-Latency v2's scheduling checks; no new
PVF entry point.)

Why the POV is the right place, and why this needs no cooperation from the
original author: a lift is a pure function of *public* data—the source's
streams and its committed roots. It carries no signature and nothing
secret, so anyone can generate it and assemble a valid candidate around
the unaltered block; the resubmission flow assumes exactly this, and every
attempt regenerates the lifts against the then-current provides, so a
block never goes stale no matter how often it is retried. The block itself
stays a pure function of its body and parent state—collators verify and
acknowledge it as-is; completing it for inclusion is recoverable by
anyone. The cost, honestly: proof verification runs in the PVF (validation
budget) rather than as metered block weight.

```rust
/// Extends the verifier's own MMR state (frontier, or peaks
/// reconstructed from an in-block inclusion proof) to a newer root:
/// O(log n) hashes summarizing the appended range.

> struct MMRExtensionProof {

Reviewer: ```rust
  struct MMRExtensionProof {
      /// leaf count, not mmr_size: every value is valid
      leaf_count: Compact<u64>,     
      /// positions derived from (old.leaf_count, leaf_count)
      connecting_nodes: Vec<Hash>,   // positions derived from (old.leaf_count, leaf_count)
  }
```

More info in: https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/pull/12659#discussion_r3664785341

>     connecting_nodes: Vec<Hash>,

Reviewer: nit: Missing docs for field

    end: MmrFrontier,
}

/// Written per block to a transient outbox (the same storage family that
/// carries `UpwardMessages`) and exposed through a single runtime API,
/// `consumption_record()`. Two callers, one definition: the node reads it
/// via ordinary API dispatch (authoring, acknowledgement checks,
/// diagnostics); the validate_block wrapper calls the API's
/// implementation directly in-wasm after executing each block—the
/// established pattern by which `ValidationResult` is already assembled
/// from pallet storage.
struct ConsumptionRecord {
    /// One interval per stream this block touched. Binding to committed
    /// roots is meaningful only where its output is checked against
    /// relay state, so it lives entirely in the wrapper (lifts).
    ///
    /// Grouped by source, mirroring the lifts' transport and the one
    /// requires entry per source it feeds; per source sorted by the
    /// StreamId's canonical encoding (designed to sort—see StreamId;
    /// `Ord` on StreamId is that order) and unique—the messaging
    /// inherent carries at most one item per stream, the STF rejects
    /// duplicates. This is the API view: the underlying outbox storage

>     /// stays a flat, host-append-only vec (the `OutboundMessages`

Reviewer: nit: `ConsumptionOutbox` so we don't confuse with `OutboundMessages: StorageMap<StreamId...`?

```suggestion
    /// stays a flat, host-append-only vec (the `ConsumptionOutbox`
```

> the candidate consumed or read.

```rust
/// Stitch one stream's intervals (bundle order) into its endpoint.
/// `advances` must contain exactly one proof per gap, in gap order.
fn stitch(
    intervals: &[Interval],
    advances: &[MMRExtensionProof],
) -> Result<MmrFrontier, Error> {
    let (first, rest) = intervals.split_first().ok_or(Error::EmptyRecord)?;
    let mut gaps = advances.iter();
    let mut current = first.end.clone();
    for next in rest {
        if next.start != MmrRoot(bag_peaks(&current.peaks)) {
            // A gap must be a proven FORWARD extension of where we
            // ended—structural, relative check; the absolute binding is
            // the lift's job below.
            let proof = gaps.next().ok_or(Error::MissingAdvance)?;
            ensure!(proof.verify(&current)? == next.start,
                Error::BrokenChain);
        }
        current = next.end.clone();
    }
    ensure!(gaps.next().is_none(), Error::StrayAdvance);
    Ok(current)
}

/// Build the requires entry for one source. `streams` iterates in
/// StreamId order (canonical); `lifts` matches it positionally.
fn build_requires_entry(

>     source: ParaId,

Reviewer: nit: We can remove the `source` from here since we can derive it from `build_requires` instead

    for ((stream, intervals), lift) in streams.iter().zip(lifts) {
        let endpoint = stitch(intervals, &lift.advances)?;
        // The endpoint is contained in the stream's current root
        // (computed, not declared)...
        let current = lift.extension.verify(&endpoint)?;
        // ...and the tree walk from it yields the StreamsRoot this
        // stream lifts to. The walk binds the RECORD's stream key, so a
        // mispaired lift cannot verify.
        let root = compute_tree_root(*stream, &current, &lift.tree_proof)?;
        // All streams of a source must lift to one and the same root.
        match entry {
            None => entry = Some(root),
            Some(prev) => ensure!(prev == root, Error::DivergentRoots),
        }
    }
    entry.map(|root| (source, root)).ok_or(Error::EmptyRecord)
}

/// The candidate's Requires set, from the per-block records (bundle
/// order) and the POV's lifts. Sources must match exactly—recorded
/// sources without lifts, or lifts for unrecorded sources, invalidate
/// the candidate.
fn build_requires(
    records: &[ConsumptionRecord],
    lifts: &BTreeMap<ParaId, Vec<RequiresLift>>,

> ) -> Result<RequiresSet, Error> {

Reviewer: nit: We might get cases when the receiver has consumed nothing in this block. We could return `Result<Optional<RequiresSet>>` instead with the mention that `lifts` should also be empty on those cases

Reviewer 2: Good point. I think it might already be covered though: a block that consumed nothing is a valid `Ok` (not an error), just with no `Requires` to emit — and `RequiresSet::is_empty()` already lets the PVF wrapper skip the signal there. So maybe we can keep `Result<RequiresSet>` and avoid a second nothing-representation (`None` vs `Some(empty)`)?

> 
> /// The candidate's Requires set, from the per-block records (bundle
> /// order) and the POV's lifts. Sources must match exactly—recorded
> /// sources without lifts, or lifts for unrecorded sources, invalidate
> /// the candidate.
> fn build_requires(
>     records: &[ConsumptionRecord],
>     lifts: &BTreeMap<ParaId, Vec<RequiresLift>>,
> ) -> Result<RequiresSet, Error> {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
/// The candidate's Requires set, from the per-block records (bundle
/// order) and the POV's lifts accepted exactly as transported. Enforces a
/// strictly increasing, canonically sorted sequence of ParaIds during decoding.
///
/// Sources must match exactly—recorded sources without lifts, or lifts for
/// unrecorded sources, invalidate the candidate.
fn build_requires(
    records: &[ConsumptionRecord],
    lifts: &[(ParaId, Vec<RequiresLift>)],
) -> Result<RequiresSet, Error> {
```

nit: This diverges a bit from the shape transported in the PoV, which requires then a conversion / alloc

PoC references:
- https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/436cd3373a71f1c2251ce3976ee04220cf2646be/cumulus/primitives/spec-messaging/src/lift.rs#L90
- https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/436cd3373a71f1c2251ce3976ee04220cf2646be/cumulus/primitives/spec-messaging/src/lift.rs#L266-L268

  share upper path segments.

This is the recurring price of the constant-size commitment—it rides in the
block body/POV, not on the relay chain, and was measured as acceptable in
the original flat-vs-hierarchical analysis
([PR #10449](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/pull/10449): a few
hundred bytes per source per block, sub-percent of the POV budget).

#### Lift Size

A lift is one MMR extension proof plus one tree proof per stale
stream: O(log m) + O(log S), m = messages in that stream.

- Typical (1000 messages to us): ~log₂(1000) ≈ 10 hashes ≈ 320 B, plus
  ~300 B tree proof.
- Worst case (24 hours of messages to one receiver, ~10⁹ leaves): ~30 hashes
  ≈ 960 B, plus the tree proof.

Extension proof size is independent of how much the sender wrote to *other*
streams; the tree proof grows only logarithmically with the sender's stream
count.

#### Practical Limits

Lifts are added to the POV by the submitter, outside block execution—so
the block must guarantee at authoring time that the worst case still
fits. The worst case is resubmission, where *every* touched stream needs
a lift: one extension proof (≤ ~64 connecting nodes ≈ 2 KB) plus one tree

> proof (≲ 2 KB), so ≤ ~4 KB per touched stream—plus one advance proof

Reviewer: > so ≤ ~4 KB per touched stream

nit: The worst-case encoded `RequiresLift` assuming <= 64 connecting nodes and 64 bit KEY_BITS paths bound:
- extension: 2 + 64×32 = 2050
- tree proof:  2 + 64×33 = 2114
- total ~4165 B

Since the authoring needs `block + storage proof <= pov limit - reservation`, we may exceed the PoV limit under edge-cases. The tree depth is a function of the sender's stream layout which the receiver can't control

Reviewer 2: Good to nail this down.

I assume your 64/64 are the correct *absolute* ceilings, but unreachable in practice. The realistic day-scale bound: 24 h ≈ 10⁹ ≈ 2³⁰ leaves → ~30 connecting nodes + a 1024-stream source → 11 Patricia steps (`O(log S)`) — **~2.8 KB** per lift, not ~4 KB.

The "sender's stream layout, receiver can't control" worry is bounded by that same `O(log S)` — logarithmic exposure, not uncontrollable in practice.

So it fits with wide margin: `10 MiB / 2.8 KB ≈ 3767` (~30×); a full-source candidate at representative scale is 3.4% of the PoV.

Please correct me if I misunderstand anything.

Author: My idea was, not sure this came across sufficiently, that we account for this additional weight when processing messages in the block - just can't process more messages than what we can provide proofs for (worst case). Will add a proper section. It certainly should be bounded.

| Channels / streams | Scarce: relay-managed deposits, per-channel relay state, governance-mediated | **Effectively unbounded**: no relay-chain deposits, no budget, no relay state per stream—open channels, lanes and topic feeds at will; acceptance priced locally by the receiver |
| Trust | Relay chain only | Relay chain + optional collator acknowledgements |
| Message data | Flows through relay chain | Never touches relay chain |

For the super-chain comparison with parallel-execution runtimes
(Solana-style), see [Super Chains](super-chains-design.md).

---

## Implementation Considerations

### Relay Chain Runtime Changes

1. **New UMP signals**: `Provides(StreamsRoot)` (block-emitted) /
   `Requires(RequiresSet)` (PVF-synthesized, never block-emitted—see
   [Requires Lifting](#requires-lifting-pov-proofs))
   ([#12347](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/issues/12347)).
   Reusing UMP signals avoids a candidate receipt format change. Rollout
   caveat: older validators reject unknown UMP signals, so the node-side
   support must be deployed to a supermajority of validators before the

>    corresponding `node_features` bit is enabled.

Reviewer: nit: I think we can do the rollout without node_features similar to Alin's suggestion, could mention that the rollout happens when sufficient node-side binaries rollout to validators

Author: True, missed that. We need not node feature. correct.

## Appendix B: MMR Extension Proof Details

An MMR extension proof demonstrates that a newer MMR root extends an older
one. The structure is defined at first use (see
[Requires Lifting](#requires-lifting-pov-proofs)); in the
implementation it is covered by `polkadot-ckb-merkle-mountain-range`
(`gen_ancestry_proof` / `verify_incremental`), an established `no_std`
workspace dependency—no hand-rolled accumulator (see
[PR #12368](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/pull/12368)).
Conceptual verification:

```rust
impl MMRExtensionProof {
    /// Extends the verifier's own MMR state (a tracked frontier, or the
    /// peak set reconstructed from an in-block inclusion proof) and
    /// RETURNS the new root—derived from the proof, never declared
    /// alongside it. No validity checks on `old`: it is the verifier's
    /// state, correct by construction.
    fn verify(&self, old: &MmrFrontier) -> Result<MmrRoot, Error> {
        // Compute the new root, treating the old peaks as opaque, fixed
        // subtrees and merging in the connecting nodes (their placement

>         // is determined by old.leaf_count): by construction the result

Reviewer: > is determined by old.leaf_count

I believe we still need a field on the `MMRExtensionProof` to mention the leaf count. Example:
- `old_leaf_count = 1 (peak at pos 0)`
- new = 3 (size 4, peaks [2,3]): need pos 1 (to build peak 2) and pos 3 -> 2 nodes, positions {1,3}
- new = 4 (size 7, peak [6]): need pos 1 (-> 2) and pos 5 (-> 6) -> 22 nodes, positions {1,5}

```
  new = 3 leaves (size 4)          new = 4 leaves (size 7)
          2                                    6
         / \                                 /   \
        0   1    3                          2     5
                                           / \   / \
     peaks: {2,3}                         0   1 3   4    peak: {6}
     need: {1, 3}                         need: {1, 5}
```

This leads to the same node count with different placements. So the count can't disambiguate and a Vec<Hash> has no well defined reading.

In this case, both proofs have exactly two hashes. The first hash goes to position 1 in both cases.
But the second hash is a leaf-peak is at position 3 in one reading and a two-leaf subtree root at position 5 in the other. This has the same `old.leaf_count` and same vector length but results in different placement. 

- RecentRoots is a `BoundedVec<StreamsRoot` that doesnt store bare root hashes or leaf counts. The verifier cannot look the target up 
- Fetcher depends on the field existance to verify the p2p message response. The verify path derives the stream head from `response.extension.leaf_count.
https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/436cd3373a71f1c2251ce3976ee04220cf2646be/cumulus/client/spec-msg/src/verify.rs#L139-L141

The fetcher then uses that info to check:
- all messages are received
https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/436cd3373a71f1c2251ce3976ee04220cf2646be/cumulus/client/spec-msg/src/fetch.rs#L298
- the peer is stalling
https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/436cd3373a71f1c2251ce3976ee04220cf2646be/cumulus/client/spec-msg/src/fetch.rs#L340

Reviewer 2: Agreed `leaf_count` stays. The redundant bit is the `u64` position inside each `connecting_nodes` entry (as the mvp branch has it today). An MMR's shape is fully determined by its leaf count, so given `old_leaf_count` (the verifier's frontier) and `new_leaf_count` (the proof's `leaf_count`, which we keep), the set and order of connecting-node positions is deterministic — exactly the positions `gen_ancestry_proof` emits.

So `Vec<(u64, Hash)>` → `Vec<Hash>` drops 8 B per node, with no loss.

Correct me if I'm wrong.

Reviewer: Yep exactly, the shape should be similar to: https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/pull/12659#discussion_r3664797589

Author: Thanks! Fixing!

// Transported grouped per source (Vec<(ParaId, Vec<RequiresLift>)>),
// positionally matched to the record's streams within each source.
struct RequiresLift {
    advances: Vec<MMRExtensionProof>, // one per interval-chain gap
    extension: MMRExtensionProof,    // chain endpoint ⊑ current; yields
                                     //   the current stream root
    tree_proof: TreeInclusionProof,  // walked from it, yields the
                                     //   StreamsRoot the entry becomes
}

// === RELAY CHAIN STATE (all of it) ===

// RecentProvides: ParaId → ring of last W StreamsRoots. Fixed size,
// nothing per stream; pruned wholesale on sender offboarding.

// === PARACHAIN RUNTIME STATE (internal, not on relay chain) ===

// Sender tracks: per-stream MMR frontiers (roots computed on demand) +
//   commitment tree nodes (StreamsRoot computed by folding touched roots)
// Channel receiver tracks: per-stream MMR frontier (position and root
//   derived from it)
// Event subscriber tracks: one monotonic highwater per consumed stream

// === OFF-CHAIN (between collators) ===

// MessagesRequest{stream, start, under: StreamsRoot, max_bytes} →

> // MessagesResponse{base, leaf_version, payloads, extension, tree_proof}:

Reviewer: nit: Missing `start_peaks` filed

### Threat: Invalid Extension Proof

**Attack**: A candidate includes a fabricated lift.

**Mitigation**: Extension proofs are cryptographically verified by the PVF.

> Invalid proofs cause candidate validation to fail.

Reviewer 2: Still the pre-0.5 one-liner. The real v0.5 argument is the stitch/forward-only-extension machinery in §Requires Lifting — verification *computes and returns* the root (never declared alongside the proof), so there is nothing for a fabricated lift to assert against. A pointer to that section would be better.

Reviewer 2: Same-family stragglers in §Security Analysis → *Threat: Message Replay/Skip* ([L3029–L3035](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/12d014653bf1fa46a85d491450030c6d6a48e21f/docs/speculative-messaging-design.md#L3029-L3035): the mitigation still reads "tracks which messages have been processed and enforces consecutive processing" — the pre-0.5 bookkeeping framing. The v0.5 story is layered and stronger: order/multiplicity are structural (frontier recomputation), no-skip is an STF rule with the gated skip-ahead exception (§Delivery Contract), and replay is blocked by the interval chain + monotonic highwater (§Requires Lifting / §Event Streams). A pointer to those sections would be better.
